docs: Add how-to  granted permissions for uib application (#2855)
bonitasoft/bonita-doc: modules/applications/pages/ui-builder/how-to-declare-permissions-for-rest-api-request.adoc

= How to grant permissions to perform requests to Bonita REST API
:description: Learn how to identify and grant the necessary permissions to your users.

{description}

When you create an application on Bonita UI Builder that is using Bonita REST API, and when you are pushing this application to production, you need to grant permissions on the API for your users or profiles. 
It ensures correct access to your production application and its resources by your users.

[WARNING]
====
You need to use the setup tool to xref:ROOT:bonita-platform-setup.adoc#update_platform_conf[update the configuration files] in order to apply the changes.
====

== Grant permissions to Bonita REST API

> Check out the xref:identity:rest-api-authorization.adoc[REST API authorizations page] in order to understand more about how the permissions are given, depending on a profile or a user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out the xref:identity:rest-api-authorization.adoc[REST API authorizations page] in order to understand more about how the permissions are granted.
```

I would not mention user or profiles as it can be granted by other means as well

=== 1. Identify the Bonita APIs used in your application

> Firstly, you need to list and identity all the queries that your Bonita UI Builder application is making to Bonita REST API.

Reviewer: since there is no "secondly":
```suggestion
First, you need to list and identity all the queries that your Bonita UI Builder application is making to Bonita REST API.
```

> To do so, open Bonita UI Builder, select your application, and click on the `Queries` tab, and list all the Bonita APIs that your application is calling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, open Bonita UI Builder, select your application, and click on the `Queries` tab, and list all the Bonita API resources that your application is using.
```

> For example, if your application makes a request to the `GET /bonita/API/identity/user` API, you will need to xref:ui-builder/how-to-declare-permissions-for-rest-api-request.adoc#_3_declare_the_permissions[declare] the permission for `identity/user`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if your application makes a request to the API resource `GET /bonita/API/identity/user`, you will need to xref:ui-builder/how-to-declare-permissions-for-rest-api-request.adoc#_3_declare_the_permissions[declare] the permission for `identity/user`.
```

=== 2. Retrieve the permissions mapping

You now need to xref:identity:rest-api-authorization#resources_permissions_mapping[retrieve the permission mapping] that is needed to perform the requests.

> To do so, open the `resources-permissions-mapping.properties` file (located in the `/bonita/setup/` folder) and check the mapping for the Bonita APIs you identified in the previous step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, open the `resources-permissions-mapping.properties` file (located in the folder `/bonita/setup/platform_conf/current`) and check the mapping for the Bonita API resources you identified in the previous step.
```

> For example, if your application makes a request to the `GET /bonita/API/identity/user` API, the `resources-permissions-mapping.properties` file maps it as `GET|identity/user=[organization_visualization]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if your application makes a request to the API resource `GET /bonita/API/identity/user`, the `resources-permissions-mapping.properties` file maps it as `GET|identity/user=[organization_visualization]`.
```

=== 3. Declare the permissions

> Edit the `resources-permissions-mapping-custom.properties` file using the mapping in the previous step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit the file `resources-permissions-mapping-custom.properties` using the mapping in the previous step.
```

Example:

> * To grant `organization_visualization` permission (which includes APIs such as `/identity/role` and many others) to user `walter.bates`: `user|walter.bates=[organization_visualization]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* To grant `organization_visualization` permission (which includes API resources such as `/identity/role` and many others) to user `walter.bates`: `user|walter.bates=[organization_visualization]`
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

* To grant `organization_visualization` permission (which includes API resources such as `/identity/user` and many others) to user `walter.bates`: `user|walter.bates=[organization_visualization]`
```

* To grant `organization_management` permission to custom profile  `manager`: `profile|manager=[organization_management]`

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a note to say: It may be more convenient to map permissions to profiles rather than directly to users and map profiles to the  organization entities (users, groups roles...)

=== 4. Push the configuration

With the setup tool, you can now xref:ROOT:bonita-platform-setup.adoc#update_platform_conf[update the permissions configuration] in the database using the `setup.sh push` command.

== Default Permissions

Some permissions are already set by default and might fit your needs. You can find the default REST API authorizations in this xref:identity:api-permissions-overview.adoc[page].

> 

Reviewer: We should add a warning "If [dynamic authorizations](https://documentation.bonitasoft.com/bonita/latest/identity/rest-api-authorization#dynamic_authorization) are defined for the resource, they override the custom permissions for profiles and roles"

= How to grant permissions to perform request to Bonita REST API
:description: Learn how to declare permissions to perform request to Bonita REST API

{description}

* Difficulty: intermediate
* Prerequisites: have an application made from Bonita UI Builder deployed on Bonita Platform
* Estimated time: 10 minutes

> This how-to guide will help you to declare the permissions that you need to grant to a profile or user to perform a request to a Bonita REST API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
= How to grant permissions to perform requests to Bonita REST API
:description: Learn how to identify and grant the necessary permissions to your users.

{description}

When you create an application on Bonita UI Builder that is using Bonita REST API, and when you are pushing this application to production, you need to grant permissions on the API for your users or profiles. 
It ensures correct access to your production application and its resources by your users.
```

[WARNING]
====
You need to use the setup tool to xref:ROOT:bonita-platform-setup.adoc#update_platform_conf[update the configuration files] in order to apply the changes.
====

> == Understand the Bonita REST API Authorizations:
> 
> Check out the xref:identity:rest-api-authorization.adoc[REST API authorizations page] in order to understand more about how the permissions are given, depending on a profile or a user.
> 
> === 1. Identify the REST API used in your application
> 
> From the Bonita UI Builder, identify the REST APIs that you want to grant permissions to.
> To do it, click on the `Queries` tab, for each Bonita API declared in your application, you need to list which permissions are required to perform the request.
> 
> For example, if you want to perform a request to the `GET /bonita/API/identity/user` API,  you need to declare the permission for identify/user.
> 
> === 2. Retrieve the permissions mapping
> 
> Based on the list of REST APIs you identified in the previous step, you need to xref:identity:rest-api-authorization#resources_permissions_mapping[retrieve the permissions] that are needed to perform the requests.
> 
> From the Bonita Platform file, look into the file `resources-permissions-mapping.properties` and give the permissions to the required profile or users
> 
> === 3. Declare the permissions
> 
> To grant permissions to a REST API resource, edit the `resources-permissions-mapping-custom.properties` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Grant permissions to Bonita REST API

Check out the xref:identity:rest-api-authorization.adoc[REST API authorizations page] in order to understand more about how the permissions are given, depending on a profile or a user.

=== 1. Identify the Bonita APIs used in your application

Firstly, you need to list and identity all the queries that your Bonita UI Builder application is making to Bonita REST API.
To do so, open Bonita UI Builder, select your application, and click on the `Queries` tab, and list all the Bonita APIs that your application is calling.

For example, if your application makes a request to the `GET /bonita/API/identity/user` API, you will need to xref:ui-builder/how-to-declare-permissions-for-rest-api-request.adoc#_3_declare_the_permissions[declare] the permission for `identity/user`.

=== 2. Retrieve the permissions mapping

You now need to xref:identity:rest-api-authorization#resources_permissions_mapping[retrieve the permission mapping] that is needed to perform the requests.

To do so, open the `resources-permissions-mapping.properties` file (located in the `/bonita/setup/` folder) and check the mapping for the Bonita APIs you identified in the previous step.

For example, if your application makes a request to the `GET /bonita/API/identity/user` API, the `resources-permissions-mapping.properties` file maps it as `GET|identity/user=[organization_visualization]`.

=== 3. Declare the permissions

Edit the `resources-permissions-mapping-custom.properties` file using the mapping in the previous step.
```

Example:

> * To grant `organization_management` permission to user `walter.bates`: `user|walter.bates=[organization_management]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To grant `organization_visualization` permission (which includes APIs such as `/identity/role` and many others) to user `walter.bates`: `user|walter.bates=[organization_visualization]`
```

* To grant `organization_management` permission to custom profile  `manager`: `profile|manager=[organization_management]`

=== 4. Push the configuration

> With the setup tool, you can now update the permissions configuration in the database using the `setup.sh push` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the setup tool, you can now xref:ROOT:bonita-platform-setup.adoc#update_platform_conf[update the permissions configuration] in the database using the `setup.sh push` command.
```

== Default Permissions

> You can find the default REST API authorizations in this xref:identity:api-permissions-overview.adoc[page].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some permissions are already set by default and might fit your needs. You can find the default REST API authorizations in this xref:identity:api-permissions-overview.adoc[page].
```

= How to grant permissions to perform requests to Bonita REST API
:description: Learn how to identify and grant the necessary permissions to your users.

{description}

When you create an application on Bonita UI Builder that is using Bonita REST API, and when you are pushing this application to production, you need to grant permissions on the API for your users or profiles.
It ensures correct access to your production application and its resources by your users.

[WARNING]
====
You need to use the setup tool to xref:ROOT:bonita-platform-setup.adoc#update_platform_conf[update the configuration files] in order to apply the changes.
====

== Grant permissions to Bonita REST API

Check out the xref:identity:rest-api-authorization.adoc[REST API authorizations page] in order to understand more about how the permissions are granted.

> === Existing platform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Already initialized Bonita Runtime
```

==== 1. Identify the Bonita APIs used in your application

> First, you need to list and identity all the queries that your Bonita UI Builder application is making to Bonita REST API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, you need to list and identify all the queries that your Bonita UI Builder application is making to Bonita REST API.
```

==== 2. Retrieve the permissions mapping

You now need to xref:identity:rest-api-authorization#resources_permissions_mapping[retrieve the permission mapping] that is needed to perform the requests.

To do so, open the `resources-permissions-mapping.properties` file (located in the folder `/bonita/setup/platform_conf/current`) and check the mapping for the Bonita API resources you identified in the previous step.

For example, if your application makes a request to the API resource `GET /bonita/API/identity/user`, the `resources-permissions-mapping.properties` file maps it as `GET|identity/user=[organization_visualization]`.

==== 3. Declare the permissions

Edit the file `resources-permissions-mapping-custom.properties` using the mapping in the previous step.

Example:

* To grant `organization_visualization` permission (which includes API resources such as `/identity/user` and many others) to user `walter.bates`: `user|walter.bates=[organization_visualization]`
* To grant `organization_management` permission to custom profile  `manager`: `profile|manager=[organization_management]`

[NOTE]
--

>  It may be more convenient to map permissions to profiles rather than directly to users and map profiles to the organization entities (users, groups roles...)

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d252fb79-7924-47b4-846f-a103dff6f18e)

Don't know if this is a preview bug or if this is due to copying-pastying Anthony's comment

Reviewer: fixed

--
==== 4. Push the configuration

With the setup tool, you can now xref:ROOT:bonita-platform-setup.adoc#update_platform_conf[update the permissions configuration] in the database using the `setup.sh push` command.

> === Initial startup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Initial setup (before first startup)
```

> If your Bonita platform has never been started, you configure the permissions in the `initial` folder to update the xref:ROOT:bonita-platform-setup.adoc#init_platform_conf[initial configuration].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Bonita platform has never been started, you can configure the permissions in the  `/bonita/setup/platform_conf/initial` folder to update the xref:ROOT:bonita-platform-setup.adoc#init_platform_conf[initial configuration].
```
